[music]
>> Hello everyone. Having a good conference
so far? Yeah. Are you having a good
conference so far? Yeah. Good.
Wonderful.
I have a message for you that I hope
will be um a comforting message for
folks who believe that uh
their skill set is no longer worth
anything in this new age, which is I
believe that software fundamentals
matter now more than they actually ever
have.
And
I'm a teacher,
and I've been recently teaching a course
called Clojure Code for Real Engineers.
Nice and provocative. And
in the process of kind of working on
this course, I had to come up with a
curriculum about
AI coding, which is a bit of a nightmare
because things are changing all the
time, right? AI is a whole new paradigm.
We need to chuck out all of the old
rules, surely, so that we can bring in
the new stuff.
And there's
a kind of movement that has come up
around this, which is the specs-to-code
movement. And the specs-to-code movement
says that, "Okay, you can write a
specification about how an application
is supposed to work. Then you can use AI
to turn it into code. If there's a
problem with the application, you then
go back to the spec. You don't really
look at the code. You just change the
spec, you run the compiler again, and
you end up with more code." Raise your
hand if you've heard of that.
Keep your hand raised if you've tried
it.
Okay, I've tried it, too. You can put
your hands down.
And what I noticed was I would run it,
and I would try not to look at the code,
but I would look at the code, and I
realized I would get code out, first of
all, and then I would run it, I would
get worse code. And I did it again, I
got even worse code. I got it again, I
kept running the compiler, kept running
the compiler, and I would just end up
with garbage.
You know, raise your hand if that's
happened to you.
Yes. I don't think this works. The idea
that we can just ignore the code and
just have the code let it manage itself
is just sort of vibe coding by another
name.
And I didn't believe that back then. I
thought, "Okay, how do I fix the
compiler? How do I make it so that it
doesn't produce bad code each time, or
worse code?"
And so I thought, "Okay, I need to
explain to the LLM in English what a
good code base looks like." Let me dig
out one of my old favorite books, which
is a Philosophy of Software Design by
John Osterhout.
Go on Amazon, get it.
Um
and he has a definition for what bad
code looks like.
He calls it complex code. Complexity is
anything related to the structure of a
software system that makes it hard to
understand and modify the system, right?
So a a bad code base is a code base
that's hard to change. If you can't
change a code base without causing bugs,
then it's a bad code base. Good code
bases are easy to change.
So I thought, "Ooh, that was good.
Let's try another book. Let's try The
Pragmatic Programmer."
Go on Amazon, get it.
They have a whole chapter on something
called software entropy. And this is
exactly what I was seeing. Entropy is
the idea that things tend towards um
disaster and uh floating away from each
other and collapse. And this is exactly
how most software systems behave, too,
is that every time you make a change to
a code base, if you're only thinking
about that change and not thinking about
the design of the whole system, your
code base is going to get worse and
worse and worse. And that's what I was
seeing.
Everything inside the specs-to-code idea
that you just run the compiler again and
again was making worse code.
Now, there's an idea that sort of drives
the specs-to-code movement,
which is that code is cheap. Raise your
hand if you've heard that phrase before,
that code is cheap. Yeah.
Well, I don't think this is right.
I think code is not cheap. In fact, bad
code is the most expensive it's ever
been.
Because if you have a code base that's
hard to change, you're not able to take
all of the bounty that AI can offer, cuz
AI in a good code base actually does
really, really well.
And this means good code bases matter
more than ever, which means software
fundamentals matter more than ever.
That's the thesis of this talk.
So let's actually get into practical
stuff.
I'm going to talk about different
failure modes that you may have
experienced, or you may not have
experienced yet with AI, and how you can
avoid them by just going back to old
books and looking at good software
practices. Sound good?
So the first one is that the AI didn't
do what I wanted.
You know, I I thought I had a good idea
in my head, and the AI just did
something totally different, or it did
some uh like specs that I, you know, it
just made something I didn't want. Raise
your hand if you've hit this mode.
Cool. Okay.
Well,
this is what they say in The Pragmatic
Programmer, is that no one knows exactly
what they want. It's that you and the
AI, there is a communication barrier
there, right?
And so when you're talking to the AI,
that's kind of like the AI doing its
requirements gathering. It's basically
working out from you what it is that you
need.
And
I realized that there was another book,
Frederick P. Brooks' The Design of
Design,
and it talks about this idea called the
design concept.
It's that when you have more than one
person designing something together, you
have this idea sort of floating between
you, this ephemeral idea of the thing
that you're building. And that thing
that you're building, or the idea of it,
is called the design concept. It's not
an asset, it's not something you can put
in a markdown file, it is the invisible
sort of
theory of what you're building.
And so I thought, "Okay, that's what's
going on. Me and the AI don't share a
design concept." So I came up with a
skill.
The skill is very, very simple. It's
called Grill Me,
and it looks like this.
"Interview me relentlessly about every
aspect of this plan until we reach a
shared understanding. Walk down each
branch of the design tree, which is
another thing from Frederick P. Brooks,
resolving dependencies between decisions
one by one."
This skill is like uh the repo
containing this skill has like 13,000
stars or something. Like, it just went
nuts, went viral. People love this
thing. It These couple of lines means
the AI asks you like 40 questions, 60
questions. I've had it ask uh people 100
questions before it's satisfied they've
reached a shared understanding. And it
means it turns the AI into a kind of
adversary, where it's just continually
pinging you ideas and trying to reach a
shared understanding.
And that means that the conversation
that you then generate, you can take
that and turn it into a product
requirements document or something. Or
if it's a small change, you can just uh
do
uh turn it directly into issues.
And then your AFK agent will then pick
it up.
And
don't at me on this, but I personally
believe this is better than the default
plan mode in uh the
tool that I use, which is Clojure Code.
Plan mode is extremely eager to create
an asset. It really wants to uh just
create a plan and start working.
Whereas I think it's a lot nicer to
reach a shared design concept first.
So that's tip number one.
Now, failure mode number two is that the
AI is just way too verbose.
It's like you're almost talking at
cross-purposes with the AI. Raise your
hand if you uh feel this. If you've ever
experienced that failure mode. Yeah.
It's kind of like the AI is like talking
just using too many words to try to
communicate what it's doing. It's not
like you're talking uh using the same
language.
And this to me felt very, very familiar,
right? If you've ever been a developer
for a long time, and you've worked with,
let's say, domain experts, someone
building an application, um let's say
the domain expert wants you to build
something on uh I don't know,
microchips. You have no idea what
microchips are.
You need to establish some kind of
shared language, right? Cuz otherwise,
they're going to be using terms you
don't understand. You're going to be
translating that into code that maybe
you don't even understand, and certainly
the domain expert won't.
And so there's this kind of language
gap between you and the domain I went
back to domain-driven design, DDD.
This is something I'm still kind of on
the edge of exploring, but everything
I'm reading about DDD is just music to
my ears. I freaking love it.
And DDD has a concept of a ubiquitous
language.
With a ubiquitous language,
conversations among developers, and
expressions of the code, and
conversations with domain experts are
all derived from the same domain model.
It's essentially a markdown file full of
a list of terms that you and the AI have
in common. And you really focus on those
terms, and you really make sure that
they're aligned with what it actually
means, and you use them all the time in
the code, when you're talking about the
code, when you're talking to domain
experts, or in our case, when you're
talking with AI.
So I made a skill.
This skill is the ubiquitous language
skill. Basically just scans your code
base, looks for terminology, and then um
creates a markdown file. Creates the
ubiquitous language markdown file, a
bunch of markdown tables with all of the
terminology.
And this, then I pass it to the AI,
and I'm able to read it, too. And I
actually have it open all the time when
I'm grilling with the AI and planning
and that. What I noticed by reading the
thinking traces of the AI, it not only
improves the planning, but it allows the
AI to think in a less verbose way, and
actually means that the implementation
is more aligned with what you actually
planned. So this has absolutely been a
powerhouse. It's been unbelievably good.
So that's tip number two. Create a
shared language with the AI.
So okay, let's imagine that you've
aligned with the AI. You know what it is
you're supposed to be building. The AI
has built the right thing,
but it doesn't work.
Raise your hands if that's happened to
you.
Yeah, just doesn't work.
Well, there's an obvious thing that we
can do to make that better, which is we
can use feedback loops. We can use um
static types, you know, if you're not
using TypeScript, uh
that's crazy. Uh if you're not using uh
if you're building a front-end app and
you're not giving it the LLM access to
the browser so it can look around,
absolutely needs that.
And you obviously also need automated
tests.
And one sort of
thing I notice here is that even with
these feedback loops, the LLM doesn't
use them very well. It doesn't kind of
like get the most out of its feedback
loops in the way that a veteran
developer would. And so it does what it
tends to do is just does way too much at
once. It will produce like a huge
amounts of code and then think, "Oh, I
should probably type check that
actually." Or I should uh you know,
maybe check a test on that or maybe do
something like that.
And this in the Pragmatic Programmer
they describe as outrunning your
headlights. It's essentially driving too
fast because
the rate of feedback is your speed
limit.
The rate of feedback is your speed
limit, which means that you should be
testing as you go, taking small
deliberate steps. And the AI by default
is really not very good at that.
So, skill number three is TDD.
You should be using test-driven
development
because TDD forces the LLM to
really take small steps. You create a
test first, you make that test pass, and
then you refactor the code to make it
nicer and consider the design.
The issue here
is that testing is really hard.
Testing has always been hard.
And the reason for that
is there are a ton
of different decisions you need to make
when you write a test.
You need to figure out how big a unit do
you want to test?
You need to figure out what to mock. You
need to figure out what behaviors do you
even want to test in the first place?
And all of these decisions are
dependent. So, if you are testing a
really big unit like an entire uh
massive application, then it might be
quite flaky. You might not want to test
that many behaviors. You know, if you
only test this unit, you need to mock
this unit, you know. It's all
interlinked. And I've been thinking
about this for years, for my entire
development career.
And what we notice is that good
codebases are easy codebases to test.
Right? So, here we're starting to get
back to the idea of code being
important. It's that the better your
codebase is, the better your feedback
loops are because you're able to um
give better feedback to the LLM, it
produces better code.
And so I thought, what does a good
codebase, what does a testable codebase
look like? Again, we go to John
Ousterhout. [clears throat]
He talks about having deep modules in
your codebase. Not shallow modules, not
lots of modules that expose type kind of
um lots of functions.
They should be relatively few large deep
modules with simple interfaces.
Let's compare them quickly.
Deep modules, lots of functionality
hidden behind a simple interface. Hiding
the complexity.
You can look inside the deep module if
you want to, but you don't need to. You
can just use the interface. Shallow
modules, not much functionality, complex
interface.
And
I'll just wait for you to take the
photos.
Shallow modules in a codebase kind of
look like this, where you have a ton of
different tiny little blobs that the AI
has to walk through and navigate. And
this is really hard for the AI to
explore actually.
And so often what you'll see is if you
have a codebase like this, which AI is
really good at creating codebases like
this,
is that you'll have a situation where AI
doesn't understand what your code is
doing. It will attempt to explore the
code, but because it's poorly laid out,
filled with shallow modules, it doesn't
maybe get to the right module in time or
doesn't understand all the dependencies,
all that stuff. It doesn't understand
your code.
And so what does a
codebase full of deep modules look like?
Well, it looks like this.
Where it's the same code, but it's just
structured inside boundaries, where you
have these interfaces on the top.
And these interfaces, you should
probably have a lot of control over them
and design them really well. Otherwise,
you know, AI might mess up the design.
But the implementation, you can kind of
leave that to the AI bit.
So, how do you turn a codebase that
looks like this into a codebase that
looks like that?
Well, I've got a skill for that. Improve
codebase architecture. Turns out this is
not It's it's quite complicated to do
this, but it's a
like a set of steps that you can
reusably do again and again. You just
sort of explore the codebase, look for
opportunities where there's code that's
kind of look um
related, and wrap all of that in a deep
module.
And this is a testable codebase because
the boundaries around this code are so
so simple. You test at the interface,
you verify using that interface,
and you're good to go. And so this is a
codebase that rewards TDD.
But how about failure mode number six?
Which is your Okay, let's say your
feedback loops are working. Let's say
that things are kicking into gear.
You're able to ship more code than you
ever have before, but your brain can't
keep up.
Right? Uh raise your hand if you've felt
more tired than you have ever before in
your development career.
Yeah, me too. It's knackering.
And I think that this is a codebase that
actually makes it harder for your brain
because you, as well as the AI, need to
keep all of that information in your
head.
Whereas this, not only is it simpler
for you to read and understand, it also
means you can kind of treat these
modules, or these deep modules, as gray
boxes.
You can kind of say,
"Okay,
I'm going to just design the interface,
but I'm not going to worry too much or
not review the implementation too much."
You can do this obviously with uh things
that are less critical in your
application. Can't do this with uh you
know, various things like finance or
whatever, but in many many modules in
your app, you don't need to think about
the implementation too much as long as
you have a testable boundary outside the
module, and as long as you understand
its purpose and can design it from the
outside. I have found this has really
saved my brain because I can just go,
"Okay, the AI, I'll let you handle
what's inside the big blob. I'm just
going to test from the outside and
verify it."
So, that's tip number five. Design the
interface, delegate the implementation.
But this means that whenever we're
touching the code, whenever we're
planning stuff, we need to think about
and be aware of the modules in our
application. We need to know that map
really well. It needs to be part of our
ubiquitous language. We need to build it
into our planning skills as well. So, my
write a PRD, inside the PRD I'm specific
about the module changes and the
interfaces inside those modules, how
they're being modified. I'm thinking
about them all the time. And this comes
from Kent Beck.
Invest in the design of the system every
day.
And this is the core of it, right?
Because specs to code, we are not
investing in the design of the system.
We are divesting from it. We're getting
rid of that.
Whereas this, I think, is absolutely
key.
And so
code is not cheap. That's the message I
want you to take away. Code is
important.
And if we think about AI as a really
great on-the-ground programmer,
a kind of tactical programmer, a
sergeant on the ground making the code
changes, you need someone above that.
You need someone thinking on the
strategic level. And that's you.
And that requires software fundamental
skills that we've been using for 20
years, for longer.
Now, if you were interested in any of
the skills I put up here, it's in the
GitHub repo macpocockskills.
And if you're interested in the training
that I do or any free stuff, I'm on
YouTube, I'm on Twitter, but I'm also at
aihero.dev, where I have a newsletter
you can check out.
Thank you so much. I hope that this
gives you confidence in this new AI age
that you can actually make a good
impact.
Thank you.
>> [music]
[applause]
[music]